# 8\. Modern Convolutional Neural Networks¶

Now that we understand the basics of wiring together CNNs, let’s take a tour of modern CNN architectures. This tour is, by necessity, incomplete, thanks to the plethora of exciting new designs being added. Their importance derives from the fact that not only can they be used directly for vision tasks, but they also serve as basic feature generators for more advanced tasks such as tracking ([Zhang _et al._ , 2021](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id332 "Zhang, Y., Sun, P., Jiang, Y., Yu, D., Yuan, Z., Luo, P., … Wang, X. \(2021\). ByteTrack: multi-object tracking by associating every detection box. ArXiv:2110.06864.")), segmentation ([Long _et al._ , 2015](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id178 "Long, J., Shelhamer, E., & Darrell, T. \(2015\). Fully convolutional networks for semantic segmentation. Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition \(pp. 3431–3440\).")), object detection ([Redmon and Farhadi, 2018](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id231 "Redmon, J., & Farhadi, A. \(2018\). YOLOv3: an incremental improvement. ArXiv:1804.02767.")), or style transformation ([Gatys _et al._ , 2016](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id79 "Gatys, L. A., Ecker, A. S., & Bethge, M. \(2016\). Image style transfer using convolutional neural networks. Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition \(pp. 2414–2423\).")). In this chapter, most sections correspond to a significant CNN architecture that was at some point (or currently) the base model upon which many research projects and deployed systems were built. Each of these networks was briefly a dominant architecture and many were winners or runners-up in the [ImageNet competition](https://www.image-net.org/challenges/LSVRC/) which has served as a barometer of progress on supervised learning in computer vision since 2010. It is only recently that Transformers have begun to displace CNNs, starting with Dosovitskiy _et al._ ([2021](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id59 "Dosovitskiy, A., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., Weissenborn, D., Zhai, X., Unterthiner, T., … et al. \(2021\). An image is worth 16 x 16 words: transformers for image recognition at scale. International Conference on Learning Representations.")) and followed by the Swin Transformer ([Liu _et al._ , 2021](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id365 "Liu, Z., Lin, Y., Cao, Y., Hu, H., Wei, Y., Zhang, Z., … Guo, B. \(2021\). Swin transformer: hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision \(pp. 10012–10022\).")). We will cover this development later in [Section 11](../chapter_attention-mechanisms-and-transformers/index.html#chap-attention-and-transformers).

While the idea of _deep_ neural networks is quite simple (stack together a bunch of layers), performance can vary wildly across architectures and hyperparameter choices. The neural networks described in this chapter are the product of intuition, a few mathematical insights, and a lot of trial and error. We present these models in chronological order, partly to convey a sense of the history so that you can form your own intuitions about where the field is heading and perhaps develop your own architectures. For instance, batch normalization and residual connections described in this chapter have offered two popular ideas for training and designing deep models, both of which have since also been applied to architectures beyond computer vision.

We begin our tour of modern CNNs with AlexNet ([Krizhevsky _et al._ , 2012](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id155 "Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., & Hinton, G. E. \(2012\). ImageNet classification with deep convolutional neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems \(pp. 1097–1105\).")), the first large-scale network deployed to beat conventional computer vision methods on a large-scale vision challenge; the VGG network ([Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id260 "Simonyan, K., & Zisserman, A. \(2014\). Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition. ArXiv:1409.1556.")), which makes use of a number of repeating blocks of elements; the network in network (NiN) that convolves whole neural networks patch-wise over inputs ([Lin _et al._ , 2013](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id168 "Lin, M., Chen, Q., & Yan, S. \(2013\). Network in network. ArXiv:1312.4400.")); GoogLeNet that uses networks with multi-branch convolutions ([Szegedy _et al._ , 2015](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id275 "Szegedy, C., Liu, W., Jia, Y., Sermanet, P., Reed, S., Anguelov, D., … Rabinovich, A. \(2015\). Going deeper with convolutions. Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition \(pp. 1–9\).")); the residual network (ResNet) ([He _et al._ , 2016](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id108 "He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., & Sun, J. \(2016\). Deep residual learning for image recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition \(pp. 770–778\).")), which remains one of the most popular off-the-shelf architectures in computer vision; ResNeXt blocks ([Xie _et al._ , 2017](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id321 "Xie, S., Girshick, R., Dollár, P., Tu, Z., & He, K. \(2017\). Aggregated residual transformations for deep neural networks. Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition \(pp. 1492–1500\).")) for sparser connections; and DenseNet ([Huang _et al._ , 2017](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id127 "Huang, G., Liu, Z., Van Der Maaten, L., & Weinberger, K. Q. \(2017\). Densely connected convolutional networks. Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition \(pp. 4700–4708\).")) for a generalization of the residual architecture. Over time many special optimizations for efficient networks have been developed, such as coordinate shifts (ShiftNet) ([Wu _et al._ , 2018](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id419 "Wu, B., Wan, A., Yue, X., Jin, P., Zhao, S., Golmant, N., … Keutzer, K. \(2018\). Shift: a zero flop, zero parameter alternative to spatial convolutions. Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition \(pp. 9127–9135\).")). This culminated in the automatic search for efficient architectures such as MobileNet v3 ([Howard _et al._ , 2019](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id118 "Howard, A., Sandler, M., Chu, G., Chen, L.-C., Chen, B., Tan, M., … Adam, H. \(2019\). Searching for MobileNetV3. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision \(pp. 1314–1324\).")). It also includes the semi-automatic design exploration of Radosavovic _et al._ ([2020](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id225 "Radosavovic, I., Kosaraju, R. P., Girshick, R., He, K., & Dollár, P. \(2020\). Designing network design spaces. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition \(pp. 10428–10436\).")) that led to the RegNetX/Y which we will discuss later in this chapter. The work is instructive insofar as it offers a path for marrying brute force computation with the ingenuity of an experimenter in the search for efficient design spaces. Of note is also the work of Liu _et al._ ([2022](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id362 "Liu, Z., Mao, H., Wu, C.-Y., Feichtenhofer, C., Darrell, T., & Xie, S. \(2022\). A convNet for the 2020s. ArXiv:2201.03545.")) as it shows that training techniques (e.g., optimizers, data augmentation, and regularization) play a pivotal role in improving accuracy. It also shows that long-held assumptions, such as the size of a convolution window, may need to be revisited, given the increase in computation and data. We will cover this and many more questions in due course throughout this chapter.

[ __ Previous 7.6. Convolutional Neural Networks (LeNet) ](../chapter_convolutional-neural-networks/lenet.html) [ __ Next 8.1. Deep Convolutional Neural Networks (AlexNet) ](alexnet.html)
