# 11\. Attention Mechanisms and Transformers[¶](#attention-mechanisms-and-transformers "Permalink to this heading")

The earliest years of the deep learning boom were driven primarily by results produced using the multilayer perceptron, convolutional network, and recurrent network architectures. Remarkably, the model architectures that underpinned many of deep learning’s breakthroughs in the 2010s had changed remarkably little relative to their antecedents despite the lapse of nearly 30 years. While plenty of new methodological innovations made their way into most practitioner’s toolkits—ReLU activations, residual layers, batch normalization, dropout, and adaptive learning rate schedules come to mind—the core underlying architectures were clearly recognizable as scaled-up implementations of classic ideas. Despite thousands of papers proposing alternative ideas, models resembling classical convolutional neural networks ([Section 7](../chapter_convolutional-neural-networks/index.html#chap-cnn)) retained _state-of-the-art_ status in computer vision and models resembling Sepp Hochreiter’s original design for the LSTM recurrent neural network ([Section 10.1](../chapter_recurrent-modern/lstm.html#sec-lstm)), dominated most applications in natural language processing. Arguably, to that point, the rapid emergence of deep learning appeared to be primarily attributable to shifts in the available computational resources (thanks to innovations in parallel computing with GPUs) and the availability of massive data resources (thanks to cheap storage and Internet services). While these factors may indeed remain the primary drivers behind this technology’s increasing power we are also witnessing, at long last, a sea change in the landscape of dominant architectures.

At the present moment, the dominant models for nearly all natural language processing tasks are based on the Transformer architecture. Given any new task in natural language processing, the default first-pass approach is to grab a large Transformer-based pretrained model, (e.g., BERT ([Devlin _et al._ , 2018](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id57 "Devlin, J., Chang, M.-W., Lee, K., & Toutanova, K. \(2018\). BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. ArXiv:1810.04805.")), ELECTRA ([Clark _et al._ , 2020](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id387 "Clark, K., Luong, M.-T., Le, Q. V., & Manning, C. D. \(2020\). ELECTRA: pre-training text encoders as discriminators rather than generators. International Conference on Learning Representations.")), RoBERTa ([Liu _et al._ , 2019](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id177 "Liu, Y., Ott, M., Goyal, N., Du, J., Joshi, M., Chen, D., … Stoyanov, V. \(2019\). RoBERTa: a robustly optimized BERT pretraining approach. ArXiv:1907.11692.")), or Longformer ([Beltagy _et al._ , 2020](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id454 "Beltagy, I., Peters, M. E., & Cohan, A. \(2020\). Longformer: the long-document transformer. ArXiv:2004.05150."))) adapting the output layers as necessary, and fine-tuning the model on the available data for the downstream task. If you have been paying attention to the last few years of breathless news coverage centered on OpenAI’s large language models, then you have been tracking a conversation centered on the GPT-2 and GPT-3 Transformer-based models ([Brown _et al._ , 2020](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id380 "Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, J. D., Dhariwal, P., … et al. \(2020\). Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, 1877–1901."), [Radford _et al._ , 2019](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id223 "Radford, A., Wu, J., Child, R., Luan, D., Amodei, D., & Sutskever, I. \(2019\). Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI Blog, 1\(8\), 9.")). Meanwhile, the vision Transformer has emerged as a default model for diverse vision tasks, including image recognition, object detection, semantic segmentation, and superresolution ([Dosovitskiy _et al._ , 2021](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id59 "Dosovitskiy, A., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., Weissenborn, D., Zhai, X., Unterthiner, T., … et al. \(2021\). An image is worth 16 x 16 words: transformers for image recognition at scale. International Conference on Learning Representations."), [Liu _et al._ , 2021](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id365 "Liu, Z., Lin, Y., Cao, Y., Hu, H., Wei, Y., Zhang, Z., … Guo, B. \(2021\). Swin transformer: hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision \(pp. 10012–10022\).")). Transformers also showed up as competitive methods for speech recognition ([Gulati _et al._ , 2020](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id455 "Gulati, A., Qin, J., Chiu, C.-C., Parmar, N., Zhang, Y., Yu, J., … et al. \(2020\). Conformer: convolution-augmented transformer for speech recognition. Proc. Interspeech 2020, pp. 5036–5040.")), reinforcement learning ([Chen _et al._ , 2021](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id456 "Chen, L., Lu, K., Rajeswaran, A., Lee, K., Grover, A., Laskin, M., … Mordatch, I. \(2021\). Decision transformer: reinforcement learning via sequence modeling. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 15084–15097.")), and graph neural networks ([Dwivedi and Bresson, 2020](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id457 "Dwivedi, V. P., & Bresson, X. \(2020\). A generalization of transformer networks to graphs. ArXiv:2012.09699.")).

The core idea behind the Transformer model is the _attention mechanism_ , an innovation that was originally envisioned as an enhancement for encoder–decoder RNNs applied to sequence-to-sequence applications, such as machine translations ([Bahdanau _et al._ , 2014](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id10 "Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., & Bengio, Y. \(2014\). Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and translate. ArXiv:1409.0473.")). You might recall that in the first sequence-to-sequence models for machine translation ([Sutskever _et al._ , 2014](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id273 "Sutskever, I., Vinyals, O., & Le, Q. V. \(2014\). Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems \(pp. 3104–3112\).")), the entire input was compressed by the encoder into a single fixed-length vector to be fed into the decoder. The intuition behind attention is that rather than compressing the input, it might be better for the decoder to revisit the input sequence at every step. Moreover, rather than always seeing the same representation of the input, one might imagine that the decoder should selectively focus on particular parts of the input sequence at particular decoding steps. Bahdanau’s attention mechanism provided a simple means by which the decoder could dynamically _attend_ to different parts of the input at each decoding step. The high-level idea is that the encoder could produce a representation of length equal to the original input sequence. Then, at decoding time, the decoder can (via some control mechanism) receive as input a context vector consisting of a weighted sum of the representations on the input at each time step. Intuitively, the weights determine the extent to which each step’s context “focuses” on each input token, and the key is to make this process for assigning the weights differentiable so that it can be learned along with all of the other neural network parameters.

Initially, the idea was a remarkably successful enhancement to the recurrent neural networks that already dominated machine translation applications. The models performed better than the original encoder–decoder sequence-to-sequence architectures. Furthermore, researchers noted that some nice qualitative insights sometimes emerged from inspecting the pattern of attention weights. In translation tasks, attention models often assigned high attention weights to cross-lingual synonyms when generating the corresponding words in the target language. For example, when translating the sentence “my feet hurt” to “j’ai mal au pieds”, the neural network might assign high attention weights to the representation of “feet” when generating the corresponding French word “pieds”. These insights spurred claims that attention models confer “interpretability” although what precisely the attention weights mean—i.e., how, if at all, they should be _interpreted_ remains a hazy research topic.

However, attention mechanisms soon emerged as more significant concerns, beyond their usefulness as an enhancement for encoder–decoder recurrent neural networks and their putative usefulness for picking out salient inputs. Vaswani _et al._ ([2017](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id302 "Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., … Polosukhin, I. \(2017\). Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems \(pp. 5998–6008\).")) proposed the Transformer architecture for machine translation, dispensing with recurrent connections altogether, and instead relying on cleverly arranged attention mechanisms to capture all relationships among input and output tokens. The architecture performed remarkably well, and by 2018 the Transformer began showing up in the majority of state-of-the-art natural language processing systems. Moreover, at the same time, the dominant practice in natural language processing became to pretrain large-scale models on enormous generic background corpora to optimize some self-supervised pretraining objective, and then to fine-tune these models using the available downstream data. The gap between Transformers and traditional architectures grew especially wide when applied in this pretraining paradigm, and thus the ascendance of Transformers coincided with the ascendence of such large-scale pretrained models, now sometimes called _foundation models_ ([Bommasani _et al._ , 2021](../chapter_references/zreferences.html#id420 "Bommasani, R., Hudson, D. A., Adeli, E., Altman, R., Arora, S., von Arx, S., … et al. \(2021\). On the opportunities and risks of foundation models. ArXiv:2108.07258.")).

In this chapter, we introduce attention models, starting with the most basic intuitions and the simplest instantiations of the idea. We then work our way up to the Transformer architecture, the vision Transformer, and the landscape of modern Transformer-based pretrained models.

[ __ Previous 10.8. Beam Search ](../chapter_recurrent-modern/beam-search.html) [ __ Next 11.1. Queries, Keys, and Values ](queries-keys-values.html)
